.TH 9AI-ACME 1
.SH NAME
9ai-acme, 9ai-sessions \- acme interface to 9ai
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B 9ai-acme
.PP
.B 9ai-sessions
[
.I dir
]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.I 9ai-acme
is an acme(1) client for the
.I 9ai
AI assistant service.
It creates a window named
.B +9ai
in the current directory, connects to the
.I 9ai
9P service (posted as
.B 9ai
in the namespace), and provides an interactive chat interface.
.PP
The following commands appear in the window tag and
may be executed with button 2:
.TP
.B Send
Send the current selection as a prompt.
If nothing is selected, the last paragraph of the window body is used.
The prompt is displayed in the window prefixed with
.LR ▶ ,
followed by the streamed response.
.TP
.B Stop
Abort the current AI turn by writing
.B abort
to
.BR 9ai/ctl .
.TP
.B Steer
Redirect the running turn.
Uses the selection (or last paragraph) as the steering message,
writing it to
.BR 9ai/steer .
.TP
.B New
Start a fresh conversation session by writing to
.BR 9ai/session/new .
.TP
.B Clear
Erase conversation history and clear the window body.
Writes
.B clear
to
.BR 9ai/ctl .
.TP
.B Models
Open a
.B +models
picker window listing available models, one per line.
Button-2 on a model identifier to switch to that model.
.TP
.B Sessions
Open a
.B +sessions
picker window listing saved sessions, newest first.
Each line contains a session UUID, model, date, and a snippet
of the first prompt, separated by tabs.
Button-2 on a UUID to load that session.
.TP
.B Login
Initiate the GitHub Copilot device-code authentication flow.
The verification URL and user code are displayed in the window.
.PP
The window body displays:
.IP \(bu
A status line of the form
.B "● <state> [<model>] <uuid8>"
updated at each turn boundary.
.IP \(bu
Each prompt prefixed with
.LR ▶ .
.IP \(bu
Streamed response text followed by a separator line when the turn ends.
.IP \(bu
Tool invocations (if any) prefixed with
.LR ⚙ .
.IP \(bu
Extended thinking output (reasoning models) in a distinct prefix.
.PP
.I 9ai-sessions
lists session files from
.I dir
(default
.BR $home/lib/9ai/sessions/ )
on standard output, newest first.
Each line is tab-separated:
.EX
    <uuid>  <model>  <date>  <first-prompt-snippet>
.EE
The output format matches the Sessions picker produced by
.IR 9ai-acme .
.SH "ARCHITECTURE"
.I 9ai-acme
runs three concurrent procs:
.TP
.B eventproc
Reads acme's event file to dispatch tag commands.
.TP
.B outproc
Reads
.B 9ai/output
and appends streamed text to the window.
Writes a separator line on each turn boundary.
.TP
.B aiproc
Reads
.B 9ai/event
(RS-delimited records) and appends formatted annotations
for turn state, tool calls, thinking, model changes,
session changes, and errors.
.PP
All window writes are serialised through a lock so that
the three procs do not interleave partial output.
.SH FILES
.B $home/lib/9ai/sessions/
.SH SOURCE
.B /sys/src/cmd/9ai
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.MR acme 1 ,
.MR 9ai 1
.SH DIAGNOSTICS
If
.I 9ai
is not running,
.I 9ai-acme
exits with an error on startup.
Start
.I 9ai
first:
.EX
    9ai -m /mnt/9ai
.EE
