.TH 9AI 1
.SH NAME
9ai \- AI assistant 9P service
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B 9ai
.B -m
.I mtpt
[
.B -s
.I srvname
]
[
.B -S
.I sockpath
]
[
.B -t
.I tokpath
]
[
.B -M
.I model
]
[
.B -L
]
[
.B -U
]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.I 9ai
is a 9P file server that exposes a GitHub Copilot AI assistant
as a synthetic file hierarchy.
It handles authentication, conversation history, model selection,
session persistence, and tool execution.
Clients interact entirely through the file interface.
.PP
The options are:
.TP
.BI -m " mtpt"
Mount the service at
.IR mtpt
after posting it.
This argument is required.
.TP
.BI -s " srvname"
Post the 9P service under the name
.I srvname
in the namespace directory.
Defaults to
.BR 9ai .
.TP
.BI -S " sockpath"
Path to the
.I 9aitls
TLS proxy socket.
If omitted, no TLS proxy is used; the service dials the
Copilot API directly via TLS.
.TP
.BI -t " tokpath"
Path to the file holding the GitHub OAuth refresh token.
Defaults to
.B $home/lib/9ai/token
on Plan 9.
.TP
.BI -M " model"
Initial model identifier.
Defaults to
.BR gpt-4o .
The model can be changed at runtime by writing to
.BR /model .
.TP
.B -L
Force re-authentication even if a valid token already exists.
.TP
.B -U
Unmount the 9ai file system from exec children's namespaces before
running each tool.
When this flag is set, every process spawned by the exec tool
receives a private copy of the namespace with
.I mtpt
removed, so the tool cannot read from or write to
.BR /message ,
.BR /ctl ,
or any other file in the 9ai hierarchy.
On Plan 9 this uses
.B rfork(RFNAMEG)
followed by
.BR unmount (2).
On Linux (plan9port) it uses
.B unshare(CLONE_NEWNS)
followed by
.BR umount2 (2)
with
.BR MNT_DETACH .
.SS "File System"
The 9P namespace served at
.I mtpt
contains the following files.
.TP
.B ctl
Read to obtain current state; returns lines of the form:
.EX
    model <id>
    status <state>
    session <uuid>
.EE
Write
.B abort
to cancel the running turn,
.B clear
to erase conversation history.
.TP
.B message
Write-only.
Write a prompt string to start a new AI turn.
The file is clunked by the client to trigger execution.
.TP
.B steer
Write-only.
Write text to redirect the current running turn mid-stream.
If no turn is in progress the text is queued as the next prompt.
.TP
.B output
Read-only.
Streams the AI's plain-text response for the current turn.
Returns EOF (zero-length read) when the turn finishes.
Reopen to wait for the next turn.
.TP
.B event
Read-only.
Streams structured event records for the current turn.
Records are separated by RS (0x1E); fields within a record
by FS (0x1F).
The first field of each record is the event type:
.RS
.TF turn_start
.TP
.B turn_start
Turn beginning.
Fields: type, uuid, model.
.TP
.B thinking
Extended thinking chunk (reasoning models only).
Fields: type, text.
.TP
.B tool_start
Tool invocation begun.
Fields: type, tool-name, input-json.
.TP
.B tool_end
Tool invocation finished.
Fields: type, tool-name, result.
.TP
.B turn_end
Turn complete.
Fields: type, reason
.RB ( end_turn ,
.BR aborted ,
or
.BR error ).
.TP
.B model
Model changed.
Fields: type, model-id.
.TP
.B session_new
New session started.
Fields: type, uuid.
.TP
.B error
Error during turn.
Fields: type, message.
.TP
.B auth_ok
Authentication succeeded.
.TP
.B auth_err
Authentication failed.
Fields: type, message.
.RE
.TP
.B status
Read-only.
A single line summarising the current state:
.BR ready ,
.BR running ,
.BR aborting ,
or
.BR error .
.TP
.B model
Read to get the current model identifier.
Write a model id to switch models.
A trailing newline is optional.
.TP
.B models
Read-only.
Tab-separated list of available models, one per line:
.EX
    id  fmt  ctx  maxout  tools  name
.EE
.TP
.B context
Read-only.
Estimates of context usage for the current conversation:
.EX
    tokens ~<n>
    limit <k>k
    usage <pct>%
    messages <n>
.EE
.TP
.B session/
Directory containing session management files.
.TP
.B session/id
Read-only.
Current session UUID, or empty if no session is active.
.TP
.B session/new
Write-only.
Write any string to start a fresh session.
The old session is saved to disk automatically.
.TP
.B session/load
Write-only.
Write the path of a session file to restore it.
.TP
.B session/save
Write-only.
Write any string to flush the current session to disk immediately.
.TP
.B auth/status
Read-only.
Current authentication state:
.BR logged_out ,
.BR pending ,
or
.BR logged_in .
.TP
.B auth/poll
Write-only.
Write
.B start
to initiate the GitHub device-code OAuth flow.
.TP
.B auth/device
Read-only (blocks).
After writing
.B start
to
.BR auth/poll ,
reading this file blocks until the device code is available,
then returns two newline-terminated lines: the verification URI
and the user code.
.SS Skills
Skills are plain-text files in
.BR $home/lib/9ai/skills/ .
Each skill file has the following structure:
.IP
Line 1: a one-line description shown to the model in the system prompt.
.br
Lines 2+: the skill body, loaded on demand.
.PP
At startup,
.I 9ai
reads the skills directory and appends a
.B Skills
section to the system prompt listing each skill by name and description.
The model is told that the full text of any skill is available at
.BI $home/lib/9ai/skills/ name
and can be read on demand by running
.B cat
via the exec tool.
.PP
Skills are never loaded automatically; the model decides when to read
a skill based on the description in the system prompt.
Placing task-specific instructions in a skill file keeps the base
system prompt short and allows the model to selectively load only
the knowledge it needs.
.SH FILES
.B $home/lib/9ai/token
.br
.B $home/lib/9ai/sessions/
.br
.B $home/lib/9ai/skills/
.SH SOURCE
.B /sys/src/cmd/9ai
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.MR 9ai-acme 1 ,
.MR 9ai-sessions 1
.SH DIAGNOSTICS
Errors are reported on standard error.
If authentication fails, write
.B start
to
.B auth/poll
and follow the device-code flow described above,
or restart with
.BR -L .
